Attitudes and feelings as you're going out in the real world.
What was the pay at that first job?
365 a month.
Dad was making 360 a month at Sinclair and had been working there 25 years, 30 years at that time.
365.
And do you remember the kind of interview questions and so forth you were asked?
Was it a very long
I think mine was most unusual.
I don't know why I did that.
I don't know where I got the confidence to do it or not.
But I just said, I want to work for GE, the best company.
And at the time, they were the best company.
They still are the best company, in my opinion, in a lot of things.
But what they did, what they designed and developed was really quality items.
So I really knew that.
and so I got to work with them for more or less 10 years and yes they did quality work.
Were there some key people at A&M as you were getting ready to leave that you wanted to thank for what if you could have that would that made a difference for you?
Crawford maybe.
I had a tough time and I think in those days
It was kind of pontifical that the profs were.
They weren't quite as friendly as I thought.
But it's not that they weren't friendly.
I didn't have a chance to know them.
There wasn't any reason to, you know.
And I think that after that, I know when I came back, I said I was going to be available for the kids.
I was going to.
Do you remember what your undergraduate GPA was?
1.87.
No, 000 under the old.
That'd make it about 287.
Yeah, under the old three-point system.
Yeah.
And I tell you, I was fortunate.
You just don't know how tough it was for me about not being very smart maybe and worrying about money all the time.
Then the folks were going to break up and, you know, there's a lot of stress kids have that we as profs overlook sometimes.
What were, as you, during that 10 years, what were the key courses that you realized they were the key courses?
Well, it's kind of the courses that I ended up teaching here.
One is the how to develop production standards to increase efficiency.
That was a course.
Another one is how to lay out a factory for smooth material flow through the factory.
The math courses are never used.
English of course always shortening I mean everybody can always be better in English whether you're an engineer or English major so I could always been better in that but I tell you I felt real good about it and then the company knew about what we could do so they didn't you know try to.
What as you look back on those ten years of experience what
did the curriculum then include more of than you needed and less of that you needed?
Well, I think, I do know that we had more labs in those days.
We had about seven labs.
Was that good?
In my opinion, it was superb.
I still remember what we did in the lab, not too much what we did in the course sometime.
But, of course, now we've cut out, dropped about five labs because labs are very expensive, take a lot of time, and nobody wants to teach them.
But, yeah, I like the labs.
And we had one course in statistics, and statistics was just coming into being.
And so I think we should have had another course in that.
Math, like I say, we had several calculus, but we didn't use, didn't have differential equations or linear algebra.
And in those days, you didn't use that.
You're more of a worker.
Kind of like the Japanese engineer of today.
They can put it together or calculate it and that's the way we used to be more putting it together, I think.
When did you get, make my mind think of slide roof?
When did you buy your first slide roof?
Well, must have been in high school.
I got a little one in high school but I remember at A&M, I went over and got a, when I was here the first week, got me a,
whatever 12 inch in a leather case you know that you hang on your belt.
Did you wear that almost every day?
No I carried it no I didn't wear it I thought it was silly to wear it you know it looked a little bit geekish I guess.
Did you take that slide rule on with you into the engineering world when you left campus?
Well actually when I got in the engineering world we had we had some
assistant, engineering assistants.
They were usually girls with math majors.
Okay.
And they had a two-foot loan.
They worked with two-foot slide rules.
Okay.
So, yeah, I took it with me.
But, you know, I remember here when it changed, the first Hewlett-Packard came out, it was really something.
400 and something dollars and could do three or four things.
Now take the story of your life then from graduation until you came back as a faculty member.
Yeah, I, graduation.
When I left here I went, I got on an engineering training program.
That's what was so good about GE.
I spent three months in Philadelphia on switchgear then I spent
until April, December to April on jet engines in Cincinnati and then went to the service for three years and I went in flying and I got to fly a lot of different airplanes for the three-year time period.
Then I came out and went to Boston and worked on jet engines and went to Tyler and worked on air conditioning.
Still with GE?
Still with GE.
At that time I met Jeanette, I met the wife, and we both, she was the secretary there at GE and Tyler, and we both moved back for two years to Cincinnati.
And then we left Cincinnati, came back to Tyler, and the reason I'm here is they moved my desk, and they said, now, this Friday we're moving your desk to Louisville, just don't take anything out of it.
We're going to move it up there and we'll see you up there Monday.
And I said, no way.
So I taught, had a friend that was, well, our Sunday school teacher.
He was a principal.
So I taught two years at junior high and came up to A&M and just said, well, I'll just, what I did, I brought my ninth graders up.
I got about nine ninth graders, boys that were pretty sharp.
And we came up here for a weekend.
And I went over to the department and I said, why don't you just take a course?
Okay.
Then why don't you just take another course?
So it just stayed here and kept taking courses.
Now that's in the mid-60s.
Yeah.
We got here in 66 and built a lab and got a master's in 67 and got a PhD in 70.
All right.
When did you become a full-time faculty member?
I got tenure pretty quick in about two years.
must have been about 72, as an assistant professor.
And that was the Department of?
Industrial Engineering.
Describe it at the time you joined.
How big was the department?
Oh, yeah.
We had about six profs.
And we had about 100 graduate students because we were doing a lot of military training for the Air Force and so forth.
And maybe 180 undergraduates, something like that.
And so we started growing.
We collected some, grew a little bit.
Then no one wanted to use, no one wanted a computer.
When that came on campus, they couldn't find anybody interested in it.
But old Burgess said, you know, we might be able to use that thing somehow.
So they started teaching computer courses.
And the graduate students were both computer and I.E.
And then computing science got up to 2,500 students and they broke off and made another department.
So I.E.
was kind of nurtured that from very, very beginning.
It was so funny no one wanted to fool with that thing.
Where was, as far as you know, where was the first computer on the campus physically located?
When I was here in 53 I worked on an analog computer it was called.
In the EE department, Dr. Hap ran that.
So I worked on that one summer for a few hours.
It must have been 54.
Was it using key punch cards?
No, no, this was using rheostats and...
generators and tubes.
And then the first one that I remember was 1401 over in the data center you had to hand wire it.
That was about in 66.
All right now that's a building attached to what is now Teague Hall.
Right.
The Teague building.
The data processing center.
Center, right.
And that was an IBM?
IBM 1401.
You had a bunch of boards, big boards, and you plug wires in them, then you slide the board in to do your task.
4K memory for the whole thing, 4 is nothing.
You know what I mean?
Gee, but in those days it was.
And then we got the IBM 3 something, 160, I don't remember.
It was IBM 95 or something.
Then we got the 360.
Who was the, when you joined the department, who was the department head?
Bill Wortham, Dr. Wortham was the department head.
And Burgess was going over to University of Texas at the time to get his doctorate, which he did.
And y'all were quartered located where?
And the old engineering building, which is near the library, which is, I don't know what's, ocean, no, archeology's in there now, I think.
Nautical or, nautical archeology is what it is.
Okay, they're in that building.
And who were the other key members of the department in those, in this?
Yeah.
In those years, late 60s, early 70s.
Wilbur Meyer.
who went on with the National Science Foundation.
He's gone to a lot of different places.
Captain Carlson was a labor relations man.
He was real good.
Covan was the time standards man and layout man, Jack Covan.
Jack Covan died of a heart attack.
Didn't see that.
Got to meet his sons.
Burgess died, I was up there in the hospital when he died with liver cancer.
Wortham had a heart attack and just, just, just died about three years ago.
Well I can't think and Burgess, I mean and Benson was the dean.
I'm trying to think of one other guy I can't.
Let's talk about Fred Benson.
Describe your
your feeling about your impressions, your evaluation of him as a dean of engineering?
Gosh, there'll never be another one like him.
Solid, honest, hard-working, didn't put up with any trivia, but was fair and thoughtful and so forth.
So Benson, of course, I kind of knew him from, I know one day he called me in when I was working here and said he would like to know if we could
What I know about a dynamometer, it seemed like Ferrari gave him a couple cars or something and so he wanted to get a chassis dynamometer which is some rollers.
You push the car on the rollers and start it up and the back wheels make the rollers go and then you can check the gasoline consumption and so on and so on.
I remember he did call me for a little project like that so I got the manufacturers in because I knew if he wanted a chassis dynamometer
Anyway, so he got, I just had all the people, I did a big report for him and he thanked me for it.
I was on the side, you might say.
How did he react to someone having a contrary, an opinion contrary to his?
There wasn't any opinion contrary, no.
I really believe he had listened but once he decided that that was the way to go he would do it.
And wouldn't look back and say that's the way it is.
Did he carry grudges?
You know he could have but I don't remember and I don't think so.
Just his appearance.
He wouldn't, but if you screwed up, if you fouled up, he would remember that, I think.
I don't know if you call that a grudge or not.
I don't think he was a grudge killer at all.
I think he listened and then made a decision.
And then stuck with it.
And a lot of people, our big problem that we were having over, no, it's not a story.
It's unusual to find a guy like that nowadays who you can trust, and you can trust it.
When he said, it's green, man, you can trust it's green.
And a lot of people...
Kind of came, one of our assistant departments came to me once and said, you know what you've got to do is do what makes you look good.
And I said, no, I'm going to do what's right in my opinion.
So I've always been that way, Haskell.
Part of it, I think I'm an engineer and I think that I've calculated out.
You want my opinion?
I'll give you my opinion based on what I know.
And then once you make a decision, you know, I'll go along with it.
But, yeah, I thought, I thought,
The dean was always in big meetings, all the meetings, he'd be real.
I did like him jingling his coin.
Every time he stood up and talked, he had about $3 worth of coins in his pocket.
He'd jingle those, and I don't know if he ever knew that or not.
Did you and the other faculty members have the impression that he was a hard worker?
Yeah, yeah.
But he wasn't ridiculous.
You know, we had one guy that wanted to prove he was a hard worker, so he stayed there all the time.
And then we found out he just parked his car there and turned the lights on and snuck out.
Yeah, Benson was honest and straightforward.
How long did it take to get a, what was the turnaround time on the answer from Benson?
Oh, it really depends on what you're talking about, but it's pretty short.
But I think on the answer to what
dynamometer was going to buy.
He had to get some more time and look at the prices, have the guys come in again.
You got here when Mr. Rutter was still president.
Yes, 66.
What did you all think about Mr. Rutter as president?
Well, you know, the wife worked for him for a while, but, and I didn't, she'd never told me any.
But you and your family.
Well, I liked him.
He was a strong conservative military guy that didn't seem to put up with anything.
When we had people step that he thought stepped out of line, he let them know about him.
And I felt we had a strong leader at the time.
Of course, didn't get to know him too well either, but.
Did you ever hear him make any speeches to the faculty or anything?
I don't remember, no.
I'm sure I did.
In fact, I didn't even remember that you're the one that read off my distinguished award, former student's award.
I'll tell you, as I'm getting over, I'll tell you what's happened, really, I don't think it needs to be on here, but after you have a bypass, and then two, a couple stints, you've been off oxygen, there is a memory loss, and not much I can do about it.
But, yeah, Rudder, I remember, is a great guy.
Were you aware before what we now know was his fatal illness, were you aware that he was in declining health?
No.
I wasn't either.
He looked robust and, you know, but didn't he have a heart attack?
Yes.
Yeah, so he had a heart attack and Williams did too, didn't he?
All right.
Mr. Rudder dies.
He's replaced as an interim by General Ludicke.
Right.
Did you and the other faculty members have any relationship to Ludicke?
as an engineer?
Well you see I was I was my mission in life has been to be a prof and I've been extremely fortunate I don't worry about I don't I've never worried about the politics even though that's part of it but
I thought he was fine.
I just said no problem with him.
I found out he was a woodworker or something.
I thought, well, he can't go all bad.
Ludicine?
I believe so.
Didn't know that.
Built furniture.
I believe you can check, but I believe so.
So when they heard that, I said, well, he's bound to be okay.
All right, then Dr. Williams.
Oh, he was kind of a fresh, friendly guy that came in, but I don't remember any major policy changes or anything he did that would affect us that much.
Someone turned off the whistle.
I think Williams did that.
Heard a whistle in Jacksonville the other day.
It was in Jacksonville, and they still have a whistle there.
I thought that was different.
What I understand,
was the reason is that some people who worked on the campus came to Dr. Williams and said, to those of us that are comparative newcomers, we feel that's like signaling that this is a factory, that there's a certain time you're supposed to start work and a certain time you stop work.
Well, this could be true, but from what I got at the time when he first came, he said, well, that's one thing we're going to change.
We're going to stop that.
Yeah.
All right.
That's kind of what I remember.
During those years, the enrollment is growing rapidly.
Yeah.
9,000, 16,000, 24,000.
For you and your faculty colleagues, describe some of the impact of that on the industrial engineering.
Well of course we, our hours teach, you know a lot of profs teach what's called nine hours and some of them six a semester and some of them nine.
We were running about fourteen I remember at one time there trying to keep up and
It looks like the university kept up with them pretty well and the stadium and the things that were happening, the classrooms.
We got Teague building was in and we went to Zachary and then we had Weissenbaker.
So I feel the planners were just a little bit short.
We should have had a few more classrooms.
But other than that I think we went along real smoothly.
All right, give some examples of how the curriculum, the instruction in industrial engineering changed during those 20, 25 years.
Yeah, well, you know, we brought the computer in.
In 72, we got our calculators kind of came into being.
Computers must have been 75.
And then we've seen a great change in that and utilizing that.
And the problem with engineering is you utilize the computers and get an answer.
So you can teach a guy a program, he can input data and get an answer, but he doesn't know what's inside the program, what causes that to happen.
But I'd say the greatest change has certainly been the computer and going away from hands-on, going away from labs.
And I think the reason we're doing that is because of the cost and no one wants to teach a lab.
Very few people do.
I had four labs a week and I was there on every lab.
And then for a while I had five labs a week, every day.
But I think labs are doing away with hands-on, more thinking, more mathematical, more computer maybe.
And I think we missed a lot in that.
How did the student body of majors in industrial engineering, how did they change?
They seemed to get smarter.
Now, we've had the big question of grade inflation, but I think as the years go by, these kids were a lot smarter than we were when we came here.
And the girls came in, and the girls we got at first were super girls.
And, yeah, I guess that's the main thing.
Dress, attitude is still about the same, kind of got— In your opinion, if you gave the same test—
to the students of recent years and to students of 25 years ago, what kind of grade would they have made on the same test?
Well, it depends on the teaching, you know, if the teaching was the same.
But let's say that, well, we didn't have, well, what would they make?
It's a good question.
Like in, for me?
Yeah, I know in years you can,
that I think that I and my colleagues graded more rigorously in recent years, but the grades were higher.
Yeah.
Because the students were better prepared.
Well, that's what I think.
Yeah, being sharper and they come in with a lot of things that
You know, they take calculus in high school.
Well, I would have done that, but they didn't have it.
They take advanced physics.
We had one physics course.
So I really feel the kids are much sharper than we were.
I feel I've seen that change.
in academics, but maybe less in attitude and ethics and judgment.
That's what it is, yeah.
Less in judgment.
Did the student body become more urban in their background?
I think so when you, I mean the old days we were from all over but there's something like five, three, four thousand freshmen from Houston and three from Dallas and three thousand and so on.
So yeah I'd say that was a change.
Maybe that's the reason we went from the old country boy approach to.
How did you all try to stay in close understanding with industry?
How did the department try to be sure that you were.
teaching what was needed.
Well I and Bill's we had field trips we had three-day field trips every year and we went to a lot of industries got the kids projects and a lot of industries so we could go kind of at least I had a good feel I thought of what they wanted.
One of our biggest problems is our new sometimes the department heads want their want to push their
uh, whatever they, their interest is instead of looking at what, what is needed.
So I kept a record of every student to graduate and what job he did and what he made.
I kept pictures of them since 73, took pictures of each one of them, tried to remember their names, kept, got a file of those in there.
Um, well, I just think it just, um,
They were sharp.
How would they do on a test?
I'd say they'd do better on a test than the old ones would.
I think we're teaching a heck of a lot more in the time span than we used to.
We're assuming a lot more things.
And of course, the statistics and math is, I'm not sure it's necessary in IE because that's not what it is, but it's grown.
For instance, I had a guy, you have time for an antidote or what?
I had a guy, Tom Black, made all A's here, went to MIT and got two degrees in two years.
now is doing great with Motorola, but I told Tom, he kept fussing at me to be a better computer jock, so you gotta be, you gotta learn that computer, Tom.
Yeah, I mean, Doc, he said, that's all, that's what it all is.
I said, well, Tom said, I'm a cutting-tarch engineer.
Yeah, I told him a little story.
Well, anyway, he graduated about four months later.
He called me and said, Doc, Doc, I'm a cutting torch engineer.
I said, OK, tell me about it.
He had 20 men, a big sugar tank with M&M, and the feet didn't fit.
The legs were all six inches.
He said, I didn't know what to do.
So the foreman said, well, we can take care of it.
He said, OK.
He said, hey, Bill, bring the cutting torch.
And they cut them off and moved them over and put the thing.
That actually happened to me with General Electric.
I designed a square funnel and did it wrong, and I probably would have gotten fired.
That was my first job, about a month into my job.
An old foreman who I got to always be friendly with everybody and be nice and be nice with the foreman.
He said, oh, we can take care of that.
He said, Bill, bring the cutting tarts, and they made a beautiful funnel out of my screwed up design.
and didn't tell anybody, just did it.
So I told Tom that I think a lot of that's in engineering.
A lot of it is doing something and being able to do something rather than the math involved in the science of it.
As far as you're aware of the curriculum today in industrial engineering here and in industry's needs for industrial engineering graduates, what
Should we teach more and what should we teach less?
Well, of course, my approach is more mechanics and statics and labs and strength materials more than we've switched mostly to, we've got about six stat courses now and five math courses.
And these guys, I don't think, as industrial engineers, are going to be using it.
Now, as maybe as design mechanical engineers, maybe, I don't think so.
What about in areas outside mechanical engineering, outside industrial engineering?
Well, yeah.
Well, of course, we have the, you know, I was on the faculty senate and kind of fought the core curriculum because it really isn't a core curriculum.
It's an engineering core.
The guys there don't take 10 hours of engineering.
So at Gettysburg, they have a core.
Everybody takes advanced math, calculus, physics, and then you can take what you want.
That would be a real core.
So we don't have that.
I was pretty happy.
We had about 18 hours of, of, of kind of people courses or liberal arts courses.
The histories certainly are required.
Well, I don't know.
All right, let's bring women into this.
When did women begin to take industrial engineering courses in large numbers?
Right now I think there are more girls in industrial engineering than any other engineering percentage-wise.
We were running about 35 percent as I remember.
When did that start?
72?
We got our first one, first few in, they were sharp as a tack.
You know, I don't have any idea, but I guess when everybody else started.
Do you remember any experiences, anecdotes, fumbles?
Yeah, everybody had to change their stories quite a bit about, you know, I remember that.
The girls would play tricks on the props sometimes, but I was very careful, kept my door open at all times when I was an advisor for many and did that.
The girls just added a lot to it.
I had one sophomore girl that was brilliant, so I let her help me with the sophomore lab, but she just did a magnificent job and brought cookies to her babies, she said, her little babies.
I thought that was cute, so we all had— And the students?
Yeah, the students.
She was a sophomore, see, and they were all sophomores, but she brought them to me.
Now, how did those young men react to having a young woman as their—
She was so great that you never knew it.
I mean she was just so great and helpful and real smart and kind of redo some of the stuff.
Do you remember any particular problems with any faculty member not wanting women in his classes?
I remember a problem with a guy trying to give her a test at night, trying to give a cute little girl a test in her apartment at night.
But he, somehow they found out about that man, didn't he?
He was gone.
I think he left mid-semester.
No, there wasn't any problems with girls.
It comes to find out there's no problems at all.
Now the problem I had on field trips, I had to be sure that we had at least two girls in the same area kind of at all times.
That bothered me and it's still, you know, very conscious of that thing, that part.
In those years?
No, they were great, man.
The girls, the problem we have now is the girls are taking over everything.
You look at Mustard, it's all girls.
But again, they're just sharp and dedicated and by golly, they got the spirit.
That's what really, when they came in, I thought they'd be real dainty.
But they came in and they're just great, great solid citizens at our school.
I think I know what you mean, but explain what you mean by that they have the spirit.
Well, I thought that the girls would first off want to
That's a good question.
I'll see if I can, I don't know how to handle that.
But they just, well they accept things.
They aren't, they aren't quite as, I mean you don't have to be, you don't have to have a Cadillac sort of, that's not coming across right.
I just think they're just solid like the guys.
And they want to study.
Oh, they're happy of A&M tradition.
Their folks were there maybe.
They aren't trying to break into the yell leaders, which they could get all-girl yell leaders if you wanted to.
They participate and are smart as a whip, most of them.
Do you recall any women trying to, pun intended, skirt around the rules to
get around doing their homework?
Did the women work as hard?
I'd say a couple of them would try that, you know, coming out of, but I think the big thing is we didn't make any.